README.md, before:

# Blowing up composite numbers

## short explanation:

*Disclaimer*: prime numbers are being excluded as being extreme (in the terms of what is described below) and not bringing much useful information via the described method.

### Base

Composite numbers have one or more factorizations.
Example:
12 =

* 12
* 2 x 6
* 2 x 2 x 3

Each of the factorizations represents an n-dimensional cube, where n is the number of factors in that particular factorization. Each  n-cube for the same composite number can be said to have the same volume (in this example 12) and can also be assigned value for surface.

Let's have a look only at the prime factorizations of composite objects - in this case 2 x 2 x 3.
This object has volume of 12 and a surface of 34.

Consider blowing up a non-elastic balloon. Blowing up a rigid airtight membrane is a process of trying to have it encompass as larger volume as possible, when you have a fixed surface.

Our case with composite objects is the reverse - trying to maximize the surface of a fixed volume.

The n-dimensional object, produced by projecting each factor of a composite object into a separate dimension, is one such blown up membrane. All factorizations have the same volume, but have different surface areas. Switching through the different factorization objects of the same volume while increasing the surface area is like trying to blow up the membrane that holds that volume as much as possible. If effect the volume will try to redistribute itself such that the surface area is as large as possible.
In the 12 example let's start with

* [ 12 ] , surface area = 12 (only one face, measure 12)
* blow it up a bit and the object becomes [ 2 x 6 ], surface area = 16 (essentially the perimeter of a rectangle of 2 x 6)
* blow it up even more to a [ 2 x 2 x 3 ] and the surface area becomes 34

It is not hard to show that the more factors you use, the larger the area. Which means that the prime factorization has the largest surface area for object of that volume, i.e. this particular n-cube for that number is the closest as you can get to a perfect n-cube with that volume.
The prime factorization of each composite number is the factorization that has the most factors for that number - you can produce each other factorization of the number by multiplying two or more prime factors together, which reduces their total number.

This all means that the prime factorization of the composite number gives the dimensions of the most 'blown up' possible object of that volume.

### Next.

It is clear that 2 x 2 x 3 is not the most symmetrical object ever, but that's a close to symmetry as it can be done with volume 12.
For comparison, 8 blows up to a perfect n-cube - each dimension reading a value of 2.

So we can make a comparison between composite objects, based on the symmetry of their prime factorization n-cubes.

As a comparison tool, let's calculate and assign a value to that symmetry. The chosen methods is the following:
* calculate the prime factors of the number
* calculate their mean - this represents the dimensions of a perfectly symmetrical n-cube of that volume, if non-integer magnitudes of the sides were allowed
* calculate the deviation of each side, compared to the mean factor
* get the mean of the deviations

If we use this method to compare two of the factorizations of 12, we'll see that
2 x 6 has a mean deviation of 4, while
2x 2x 3 has a mean deviation of 3.25 - the most symmetrical n-cube 12 can do
(again, 8 has a mean deviation of 0, because all of it's factors are equal, i.e. they equal the mean)

Now we can make a comparison between sets of composite numbers.

List the numbers, calculate the mean deviations and plot them.

---
## notes on the data and the graph

**graph**

The x-axis are the composite numbers (primes are excluded by default, but can be included by changing the value of include_primes in config.ini to true)

The y-axis are the calculated mean prime factor deviations.



**antislope**
As an additional piece of data I added the slope for each data point. However in the early iterations I mistakenly calculated that slope in reverse - run / rise. And it's good that I did, because the values of that antislope are easier to read than the real slope values (4.005 is better than 0.2496). That's why the graph reports the antislope (1 / slope or run/rise). As it will become apparent later, the antislopes have a way of converging nicely to integer values, which can prove useful. I consider this error fortuitous, as I can not imagine I would have easily seen a pattern in the slopes.

The lines that the points form on the graph are not real lines, but are very close.

It turns out that if you round the antislope of the points to their closest integer, all numbers fall into families.

The topmost line  have slopes that round down to 4. Not only that, but the antislopes actually slowly converge to 4. The difference starts big (4.471 for 38), but that's to be expected, but at 166 the antislope is below 4.1 and at 1706 it drops below 4.01.



The antislopes in the next line converge to 6q the next - 9, then 10 and so on.

There are similar lines below the top one that converge on higher antislopes - the next one being 6, then 9, then 10 and so on.

It's easy to find (looking at the graph) which numbers converge to which integer antislope - another description of the same families of numbers is the product of all prime factors of the number except the largest one.

I.e. all numbers that produce 2 when divided by their largest prime factor will have antislope that is rounded down to 4. All numbers that produce 3 will have antislope rounded down to 6.

| Integer antislope | Prime factors (P = largest prime) | Number / P (P = largest prime) |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| 4                 | 2, P                              | 2                              |
| 6                 | 3, P                              | 3                              |
| 9                 | 2, 2, P                           | 4                              |
| 10                | 5, P                              | 5                              |
| 13                | 2, 3, P                           | 6                              |
| 14                | 7, P                              | 7                              |

And yes, it can be seen that consecutive families produce consecutive integers (starting at 2) when dividing the numbers in each family by the number's largest factor.

This, practically, means that each line is a modulo N family, where N is a positive integer. And those family lines fall below one another.

**TO BE EXPLORED**

- Why the integer slope is 4, 6, 9...? It probably relates to the remainder when removing the largest prime factor, but I have yet to find how. (Just to be sure, I looked in OEIS for the first 10 integer antislopes - 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 20, 21, 22, 26 - and did not find a matching sequence)
- Rate of converges to those limits - why converge at all and why always from above?



**PROBLEM**

The 'integer antislope' concept hits a limit pretty soon, which means that the converging behaviour is questionable.

Example:

Look at **7183** and **7190**

7183 has factors 11, 653 and 7190 has 2, 5, 719
That puts 7183 in the family of numbers divisible by 11 and 7190 - divisible by 10.
But thus far it seemed that the higher this divisibility factor, the higher the integer antislope of the number.
The problem is that 7183 has an antislope of 22.377 and 7190 has an antislope 22.610, which puts the larger number on a lower integer antislope line. More importantly, it also means that both converge to 22.



---
## notes on the code and the graph

**beware**: this code has not been optimized; 1-10000 takes 7 seconds to run, but I am yet to gather the patience to wait for a 1-100000 run

**colors**: The library I chose for visualization (bokeh) has a limit on the number of colors that can be used - 11.
I could not color each antislope line, so I did some bucketing, based on the antislope - if we have X antislope lines on the graph, the heavier half of them (the half with largest antislopes) are in one color bucket. Of the rest, the heavier half is another color bucket and so on.
As a result the first one or two lines are different colors, then you have 2 with the same color, 4 with another and so on.
Given that the colors are only for graph readability, I don't plan to optimize that further for now.

**'slope' named variables**: as mentioned, the value of slope was initially calculated in reverse, by mistake; afterwards these inverse values actually proved very useful, so the concept was kept as it is and renamed to 'antislope'; however, for simplicity, the related variables in the code remain 'slope'; they may be renamed 'anti-' in future iterations

Commit message:

Update requirements; add .csv output files to repo

README.md, after:

## how to view the prepared data from the repo

**graph**

The mail.html file is exported by the bokeh visualization library on each run.

This file can be viewed by opening the following link:

https://raw.githack.com/MossGoblin/factorization/master/main.html

Keep in mind that every time I go through a new local run and push my changes to the repo, the main.html file will be replaced with the new version.

If there is any other html file, it is most likely a file from a previous run that was renamed manually in order to be preserved between runs.

To view such a file, do the following:

1. Copy the link to the .html file from the repo - for example https://github.com/MossGoblin/factorization/blob/master/main_1000000.html
2. Go to https://raw.githack.com and paste the link there
3. Copy one of the resulting URLs, preferably the one for development, and open it in your browser.

**csv**

The csv files, if any are present in the repo, are in the 'csv_output_folder' folder. The file with latest date should match the data in main.html. To make sure, compare the range in the filename of the csv to the title of the graph, when you open it in your browser.

------

# Blowing up composite numbers

## explanation of the idea:

*Disclaimer*: prime numbers are not mentioned in the explanation as being extreme (in the terms of what is described below). All of the below works for them, but I don't think they bring much to the table at this point.

### Base

Composite numbers have one or more factorizations.
Example:
12 =

* 12
* 2 x 6
* 2 x 2 x 3

Each of the factorizations represents an n-dimensional cube, where n is the number of factors in that particular factorization. Each  n-cube for the same composite number can be said to have the same volume (in this example 12) and can also be assigned value for surface.

Let's have a look only at the prime factorizations of composite objects - in this case 2 x 2 x 3.
This object has volume of 12 and a surface of 34.

Consider blowing up a non-elastic balloon. Blowing up a rigid airtight membrane is a process of trying to have it encompass as larger volume as possible, when you have a fixed surface.

Our case with composite objects is the reverse - trying to maximize the surface of a fixed volume.

The n-dimensional object, produced by projecting each factor of a composite object into a separate dimension, is one such blown up membrane. All factorizations have the same volume, but have different surface areas. Switching through the different factorization objects of the same volume while increasing the surface area is like trying to blow up the membrane that holds that volume as much as possible. If effect the volume will try to redistribute itself such that the surface area is as large as possible.
In the 12 example let's start with

* [ 12 ] , surface area = 12 (only one face, measure 12)
* blow it up a bit and the object becomes [ 2 x 6 ], surface area = 16 (essentially the perimeter of a rectangle of 2 x 6)
* blow it up even more to a [ 2 x 2 x 3 ] and the surface area becomes 34

It is not hard to show that the more factors you use, the larger the area. Which means that the prime factorization has the largest surface area for object of that volume, i.e. this particular n-cube for that number is the closest as you can get to a perfect n-cube with that volume.
The prime factorization of each composite number is the factorization that has the most factors for that number - you can produce each other factorization of the number by multiplying two or more prime factors together, which reduces their total number.

This all means that the prime factorization of the composite number gives the dimensions of the most 'blown up' possible object of that volume.

### Next.

It is clear that 2 x 2 x 3 is not the most symmetrical object ever, but that's a close to symmetry as it can be done with volume 12.
For comparison, 8 blows up to a perfect n-cube - each dimension reading a value of 2.

So we can make a comparison between composite objects, based on the symmetry of their prime factorization n-cubes.

As a comparison tool, let's calculate and assign a value to that symmetry. The chosen methods is the following:
* calculate the prime factors of the number
* calculate their mean - this represents the dimensions of a perfectly symmetrical n-cube of that volume, if non-integer magnitudes of the sides were allowed
* calculate the deviation of each side, compared to the mean factor
* get the mean of the deviations

If we use this method to compare two of the factorizations of 12, we'll see that
2 x 6 has a mean deviation of 4, while
2x 2x 3 has a mean deviation of 3.25 - the most symmetrical n-cube 12 can do
(again, 8 has a mean deviation of 0, because all of it's factors are equal, i.e. they equal the mean)

Now we can make a comparison between sets of composite numbers.

List the numbers, calculate the mean deviations and plot them.

---
## notes on the data and the graph

**graph**

The x-axis are the composite numbers (primes are excluded by default, but can be included by changing the value of include_primes in config.ini to true)

The y-axis are the calculated mean prime factor deviations.



**antislope**
As an additional piece of data I added the slope for each data point. However in the early iterations I mistakenly calculated that slope in reverse - run / rise. And it's good that I did, because the values of that antislope are easier to read than the real slope values (4.005 is better than 0.2496). That's why the graph reports the antislope (1 / slope or run/rise). As it will become apparent later, the antislopes have a way of converging nicely to integer values, which can prove useful. I consider this error fortuitous, as I can not imagine I would have easily seen a pattern in the slopes.

The lines that the points form on the graph are not real lines, but are very close.

It turns out that if you round the antislope of the points to their closest integer, all numbers fall into families.

The topmost line  have slopes that round down to 4. Not only that, but the antislopes actually slowly converge to 4. The difference starts big (4.471 for 38), but that's to be expected, but at 166 the antislope is below 4.1 and at 1706 it drops below 4.01.



The antislopes in the next line converge to 6q the next - 9, then 10 and so on.

There are similar lines below the top one that converge on higher antislopes - the next one being 6, then 9, then 10 and so on.

It's easy to find (looking at the graph) which numbers converge to which integer antislope - another description of the same families of numbers is the product of all prime factors of the number except the largest one.

I.e. all numbers that produce 2 when divided by their largest prime factor will have antislope that is rounded down to 4. All numbers that produce 3 will have antislope rounded down to 6.

| Integer antislope | Prime factors (P = largest prime) | Number / P (P = largest prime) |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| 4                 | 2, P                              | 2                              |
| 6                 | 3, P                              | 3                              |
| 9                 | 2, 2, P                           | 4                              |
| 10                | 5, P                              | 5                              |
| 13                | 2, 3, P                           | 6                              |
| 14                | 7, P                              | 7                              |

And yes, it can be seen that consecutive families produce consecutive integers (starting at 2) when dividing the numbers in each family by the number's largest factor.

This, practically, means that each line is a modulo N family, where N is a positive integer. And those family lines fall below one another.

**TO BE EXPLORED**

- Why the integer slope is 4, 6, 9...? It probably relates to the remainder when removing the largest prime factor, but I have yet to find how. (Just to be sure, I looked in OEIS for the first 10 integer antislopes - 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 20, 21, 22, 26 - and did not find a matching sequence)
- Rate of converges to those limits - why converge at all and why always from above?



**PROBLEM**

The 'integer antislope' concept hits a limit pretty soon, which means that the converging behaviour is questionable.

Example:

Look at **7183** and **7190**

7183 has factors 11, 653 and 7190 has 2, 5, 719
That puts 7183 in the family of numbers divisible by 11 and 7190 - divisible by 10.
But thus far it seemed that the higher this divisibility factor, the higher the integer antislope of the number.
The problem is that 7183 has an antislope of 22.377 and 7190 has an antislope 22.610, which puts the larger number on a lower integer antislope line. More importantly, it also means that both converge to 22.

---
# notes on the code and the graph

**beware**: this code has not been optimized; 1-10000 takes 7 seconds to run, and 1-100000 run takes more than 30 min. If at some point I feel the need to generate frequently larger datasets, I'll work on optimizing the code for speed.

**colors**: The library I chose for visualization (bokeh) has a limit on the number of colors that can be used - 11.
I could not color each antislope line, so I did some bucketing, based on the antislope - if we have X antislope lines on the graph, the heavier half of them (the half with largest antislopes) are in one color bucket. Of the rest, the heavier half is another color bucket and so on.
As a result the first one or two lines are different colors, then you have 2 with the same color, 4 with another and so on.
Given that the colors are only for graph readability, I don't plan to optimize that further for now.

**'slope' named variables**: as mentioned, the value of slope was initially calculated in reverse, by mistake; afterwards these inverse values actually proved very useful, so the concept was kept as it is and renamed to 'antislope'; however, for simplicity, the related variables in the code remain 'slope'; they may be renamed 'anti-' in future iterations
